chromebook guide (#234)
hexdump0815/imagebuilder: doc/chromebooks/luks-installation.md

├─mmcblk1p4  179:4    0 107,9G  0 part /
└─mmcblk1p5  179:5    0     8G  0 part [SWAP]
mmcblk1boot0 179:32   0     4M  1 disk 
mmcblk1boot1 179:64   0     4M  1 disk
```

now in order to make it simple to just copy and paste the commands
we will export the correct drive as a environment variable but i still encourage you to read as much as possible here

_Note. remmber to do it whenever you want to repeat any of steps below_

- if you want to install onto ```mmcblk0``` or ```mmcblk1``` (number is diffent on diffrent chromebooks)
```
export disk=mmcblk0
export part=mmcblk0p
```
or
```
export disk=mmcblk1
export part=mmcblk1p
```
respecitively

- if you want to install on sda or similar
```
export disk=sda
export part=sda
```

3. prepare the disk

wipe the target disk first
```
apt-get install cgpt # should be already installed
sgdisk -Z /dev/${disk}
partprobe /dev/${disk}
sgdisk -C -e -G /dev/${disk}
partprobe /dev/${disk}
cgpt create /dev/${disk}
partprobe /dev/${disk}
```

create kernel partition
```
cgpt add -i 1 -t kernel -b 8192 -s 65536 -l KernelA -S 1 -T 2 -P 10 /dev/${disk}
cgpt add -i 2 -t kernel -b 73728 -s 65536 -l KernelB -S 0 -T 2 -P 5 /dev/${disk}
```

> 

Reviewer: we should maybe bring over the special commands required for veyron from https://github.com/hexdump0815/imagebuilder/blob/main/doc/install-to-emmc-with-luks-full-disk-encryption.txt#L48-L57 here as well so that this chromebook is also covered properly

Author: wasn't sure if veyron shouldn't be treated as legacy stuff so i left it out but can add

_Note. you don't need to format them or select specyfic type, just make them correct size we will format them later_

5. make filesystems

format boot partition
```
mkfs -t ext4 -O ^has_journal -m 0 -L bootemmc /dev/${part}3
```
_Note. -L argument specyfies the partition lable which you can change if you want_

format encrypted root partition
```
cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/${part}4
```
map encrypted partition
```
cryptsetup open --type luks /dev/${part}4 encrypted
```
create filesystem there
```
mkfs -t btrfs -m single -L rootemmc /dev/mapper/encrypted
```
mount filesystem to /mnt
```
mount -o ssd,compress-force=zstd,noatime,nodiratime /dev/mapper/encrypted /mnt
cd /mnt
mkdir -p /mnt/boot
mount /dev/${part}3 /mnt/boot
```

6. copy over the usb filesystem
 
now we sync filesystem with the one on the installation medium
```
rsync -axADHSX --no-inc-recursive --delete /boot/ /mnt/boot
rsync -axADHSX --no-inc-recursive --delete --exclude='/swap/*' / /mnt
```

7. setup swap (optional but recommended)

setup swap folder
```
rm -rf /mnt/swap
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/swap
chmod 755 /mnt/swap
chattr -R +C /mnt/swap
btrfs property set /mnt/swap compression none
cd /mnt/swap
```

> _See. https://blog.passcod.name/2020/jun/16/full-disk-encryption-with-btrfs-swap-and-hibernation_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With newer kernels / btrfs tools the property setting command might result in a warning which can be ignored in such cases - it should still work fine.

_See. https://blog.passcod.name/2020/jun/16/full-disk-encryption-with-btrfs-swap-and-hibernation_
```

chroot /mnt mount -t sysfs sysfs /sys 
mount --bind /dev /mnt/dev 
mount --bind /run /mnt/run
chroot /mnt
```
_Note. this will make it so, the target disk will be treated like a root directory in that terminal as long as you don't type ```exit```_

_Note. after entering the command, if you want to be sure you are still in chroot, you can type ```export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"``` (it doesn't check for being inside chroot but gives visual indicator untill u exit it)_

<details>
<summary>if you messed up and want to enter chroot again after reboot
</summary>

you need to export the drive and part from part one again (look up)
and mount the partitions again
```
#root
cryptsetup open --type luks /dev/${part}4 encrypted
mount -o ssd,compress-force=zstd,noatime,nodiratime /dev/mapper/encrypted /mnt
#boot
mount /dev/${part}3 /mnt/boot
```
and then run commands to enter chroot again
</details>

now in the /boot directory create as "simple script" :3
```
nano /boot/kernel-and-initrd.sh
```
<details>
<summary>here is the script</summary>

```
#!/bin/bash

if [ "$(whoami)" != "root" ]; then
  echo "This script must be ran as root."
  exit 1
fi

cd /boot || exit

> # choosing kelner version

Reviewer: can we please change "kelner" to "kernel" here everywhere and in the provided script? - i know that you usually use this name, but naming it "kernel" as usual it might be more clear to others what is ment

Author: yeah it wasn't on purpose
it's just the fact i have dyslexia
and i keep swapping l with r since these sound similar in my language and 'm never able to figure out which is first unless i look it up

will fix it

echo ""
echo "for single boot only testing:"

#echo "IMPORTANT: please double check your mmcblk device name beforehand"
#already take care of above

echo ""
echo "  dd if=/boot/vmlinux.kpart-initrd-${kver} of=${kpart}2"
echo "  cgpt add -i 2 -S 0 -T 1 -P 15 /dev/${pdisk}"
echo ""
echo "to always boot this kernel after successful testing:"
echo ""
echo "  dd if=/boot/vmlinux.kpart-initrd-${kver} of=${kpart}1"
echo ""

```
</details>

you can also find it [here](./kernel-and-initrd.sh)

make it executable
```
chmod +x /boot/kernel-and-initrd.sh
```
and run once
```
/boot/kernel-and-initrd.sh
```

after script is done you need to flash the "to always boot this kernel ..."

_Note. if you want to modify kelner cmdline, after first run the script will generete a cmdline file at /boot/cmdline , you can edit it and rerun script again then flash the image, ofc you can also do that later without chroot if you boot into actual system_ 

_Note. we're flashing this image to always boot because when at first non of partitions here contain kernel with proper initramfs, later when upgrading the kelner or cmdline, it's a good idea to test the kelner first so you don't brick you system_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

_Note. please make sure that there is enough space in /boot before running this script (when working there with multiple kernel versions, some older unused ones might habe to be removed first) and watch out for potential errors when running it as they might result in a broken and unbootable kernel in the worst case_

```

> _Note. if something goes wrong and you can't see what becauseof splash screen, you can remove ```quiet splash``` from /boot/cmdline and rerun the script, then reflash_

Reviewer: missing space
```suggestion
_Note. if something goes wrong and you can't see what because of splash screen, you can remove ```quiet splash``` from /boot/cmdline and rerun the script, then reflash_
```
